README.md, before:

---
fontfamily: libertinus
geometry:
- margin=1in
papersize: letter
pdf-engine: lualatex
---

# Introduction to Digital Humanities - Tufts University, Fall 2025

![Bandeau de Manifest des Digital Humanities by Michael Cixous, Public Domain, via Wikimedia Commons](./img/manifeste-bandeau.png)

## Details

Time: T 6–9pm <br/>    
Location: Eaton Hall 371 <br/>    
Instructor: Charles Pletcher (charles.pletcher@tufts.edu) <br/>    
Instructor Office Hours: TTh 3–4pm <br/>    

Teaching Assistant: Zoë Spriggs (zoe.spriggs@tufts.edu) <br/>    
TA Office Hours: TBD

## Prerequisites

None

## Description

In a recent article in the _New Yorker_, Princeton professor D. Graham Burnett observes, "But to
be human is not to have answers. It is to have _questions_—and to live with them. The machines
can’t do that for us. Not now, not ever" ("Will the Humanities Survive Artificial Intelligence?",
April 26, 2025). For us to grapple with what "the machines" mean to us---or, in bleaker terms, what
business-types want artificial intelligence (AI) to mean for their bottom lines---we must first
understand the limits of what the machines can do.

This course explores the so-called "digital humanities" with a view towards the role of
computational methods, including AI, in the humanistic disciplines. This exploration will entail
learning to view textual and material objects of study from new angles, but it also involves
learning how to scrutinize each angle of interpretation.

Beginning with workshops on textual encoding, students will gain exposure to diverse disciplines
at the intersection of data science and the humanities, from Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
to Natural Language Processing (NLP), generative art and music, and network analysis.

Students will gain familiarity with the Python programming language, as well as tools like
Voyant, TEI XML, ArcGIS, and Gephi. Through readings ranging from antiquity to the present,
students will learn about the history of the digital humanities and engage in code criticism.

Assessments include weekly quizzes or discussion posts, collaborative projects, and a final
cumulative project of each student's design.

## Learning objectives

Successfully completing this course will equip students to

1.	Explain what the digital humanities are and how they relate to other forms of humanities research;
2.	Write and execute basic Python scripts;
3.	Pre-process a text/corpus in preparation for natural language processing;
4.	Parse complex data structures such as Python dictionaries and Pandas data frames;
5.	Apply digital methodologies of various kinds to humanities related data;
6.	Evaluate the methodologies and results of digital humanities projects.


## Textbooks

### Required

(These are all either open-access or available through the Tufts Library's digital subscriptions.)

- William Mattingly. _Introduction to Python for Humanists_. 2022. https://python-textbook.pythonhumanities.com/
- James O'Sullivan, ed. _The Bloomsbury Handbook to the Digital Humanities_. Bloomsbury, 2022.
- Plato. _Statesman. Philebus. Ion._ Translated by Harold North Fowler, W. R. M. Lamb. Loeb Classical Library 164. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1925. https://www.loebclassics.com/view/LCL164/1925/volume.xml

### Recommended

- Dennis Yi Tenen. _Literary Theory for Robots: How Computers Learned to Write_. W.W. Norton & Company, 2024.

Other readings will be provided through the course website.

## [Schedule](./schedule.md)

See the file located at [schedule.md](./schedule.md) for the most up-to-date list of assignments.

## Grading

- 1/6 Attendance and participation
- 1/6 Reading quizzes
- 1/3 Labs and midterm projects
- 1/3 Final project

### 1/6 Attendance and participation

As we only meet once a week, missing even one class could leave you far behind. Although
much of the material will be posted online, class time will be used to troubleshoot,
debug, and debrief (read: "vent about how hard programming is").

Obviously emergencies happen, and everyone is allowed one (1) unexcused absence. Further
unexcused absences will result in a deduction of half a letter grade _from your final grade_.

Excused absences are easy to obtain: please just give me as much notice as possible. (I try
to keep track of religious holidays, but a heads-up is always appreciated.)

### 1/6 Reading quizzes

Starting in Week 2, we will have a reading quiz approximately every other class. These quizzes
are not meant to be punitive. Rather, think of them as 10 minutes or so to reflect, as cogently
as you can, on specific aspects of the reading.

At the end of the semester, I will drop the lowest one (for graduate students) or two (for
undergraduates) reading quiz scores when calculating your average for the term.

### 1/3 Labs and midterm projects

We will start a lab in class approximately every other week; the lab will be due at 11:59 p.m.
following the next class.

Each lab will also ask you to write a short but detailed reflection on your process and
what you have learned. These short essays are meant to help you as you decide on your
midterm and final projects.

Think of the midterm project as the final project in miniature. This is a chance for you
to experiment with a methodology or take the next logical steps with a lab. If it works,
take the project even further for the final; if it doesn't, the final project gives you a
mulligan. **Null results are valid here.**

### 1/3 Final project

The final project is a chance for you to demonstrate your mastery over some aspect of digital
humanities that we have covered during the semester. Start thinking early about what experiments
you might want to run or what tools/resources you might want to build for your final project,
and feel free to send me an email or come to office hours as soon as you have ideas.

## Statement on AI

(Adapted from ["Artificial Intelligence"](https://provost.tufts.edu/celt/online-resources/artificial-intelligence/ai-syllabus-statements/)
by the Tufts' Center for the Enhancement of Learning and Teaching)

This course discourages the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI)
for translation assignments. At the same time, the course also provides
opportunities to explore the use of GAI in supplementing or augmenting our
abilities to engage with and understand Homeric song.

To this end, we will adhere to the following guidelines:

1. **NEVER** submit AI-generated work as your own. To do so is
considered a violation of Tufts' [Academic Integrity Policy]
(https://students.tufts.edu/community-standards/academic-integrity/academic-integrity-overview).
2. Familiarize yourself with the limitations of GAI tools. These tools all come with inherent
biases, and they all make mistakes. Be aware that no matter how "confident" the AI seems, it does
not actually "know" anything.
3. Cite all uses of AI. See suggestions from the [Chicago Manual of
Style](https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/qanda/data/faq/topics/Documentation/faq0422.html) and
the [MLA](https://style.mla.org/citing-generative-ai/).
4. In addition to citation, please identify _how_ the GAI contributed to your work. (Your
explanation need not be more than a sentence or two.)
5. If have any questions, please contact me by email, during office hours, or in class.

## Policies

### Attendance

Emergencies arise. Everyone is permitted one unexcused absence. If you will need to miss additional
classes, please let me know as soon as possible. Unexcused absences will count as a 0 for that day's
participation grade.

You are responsible for catching up on any work that you have missed, either by coming to office
hours or working with a classmate. As a rule, I will not share lecture notes outside of what is
already available on the course website.

#### Heads-up about Thanksgiving

We will be having class on the Tuesday before Thanksgiving. As a once-weekly class, each session
is too important to miss. Please make your travel plans accordingly.

### Computer use

Please only use your computer (or tablet or phone) during designated times in class. Importantly,
please **do not** use your computer when translating.

### Food and drink

Please eat only during breaks. (We'll have one about halfway through each class.)

Otherwise, please stay hydrated.


### Sharing

This course is designed for everyone to feel comfortable participating in discussion, asking
questions, learning, and facilitating the learning of others.  In order for that atmosphere to be
maintained, the recordings of our conversations will only be shared with the enrolled students in
the class (not posted publicly) and it is prohibited for any of us who have access to the video
to share it outside the course. Similarly, I have specifically designed the exams, handouts, and
lectures for the people who are enrolled in the course this term and those may not be shared outside
this course. All of this content is freely available on GitHub under a Creative Commons license —
attribution is all that is required.

## Resources

### Religious accommodations

Tufts University faculty, staff, and administration highly value and acknowledge the religious
diversity of its student body. Students seeking religious accommodations related to their holy
days are encouraged to collaborate with faculty to make arrangements during the first week of each
semester. Consult the [Multifaith Calendar](https://chaplaincy.tufts.edu/multifaith-calendar/)
for upcoming holidays, links to the University Religious Accommodations Policy, and members of the
University Chaplaincy who are available to respond to questions on religious observances.

### Accommodations for students with disabilities

Tufts is committed to providing equal access and support to all qualified students through
the provision of reasonable accommodations. If you have a disability that requires reasonable
accommodations, contact the StAAR Center at StaarCenter@tufts.edu or 617-627-4539. Please be aware
that accommodations cannot be enacted retroactively, making timeliness a critical aspect for their
provision.

### Academic support at the StAAR Center

The StAAR Center offers a variety of FREE resources to all students. Students may make an
appointment to work on any writing-related project or assignment, attend subject tutoring in a
variety of disciplines, or meet with an academic coach to hone skills like time management and
navigating procrastination. Students can make an appointment for any of these services by visiting
https://students.tufts.edu/staar-center.

### Student support, including mental health

As a student, there may be times when personal stressors or difficulties interfere with your
academic performance or well-being. The Dean of Student Affairs Office offers support and care
to undergraduates and graduate students who are experiencing difficulties, and can also aid
faculty in their work with students. In addition, through Tufts’ Counseling and Mental Health
Service (CMHS) students can access mental health support 24/7, and they can provide information on
additional resources. CMHS also provides confidential consultation, brief counseling, and urgent
care at no cost for all Tufts undergraduates as well as for graduate students who have paid the
student health fee. To make an appointment, call 617-627-3360. Please visit the CMHS website:
http://go.tufts.edu/Counseling to learn more about their services and resources.

Commit message:

Update README with grading scale and clearer language around absences

README.md, after:

---
fontfamily: libertinus
geometry:
- margin=1in
papersize: letter
pdf-engine: lualatex
---

# Introduction to Digital Humanities - Tufts University, Fall 2025

![Bandeau de Manifest des Digital Humanities by Michael Cixous, Public Domain, via Wikimedia Commons](./img/manifeste-bandeau.png)

## Details

Time: T 6–9pm <br/>    
Location: Eaton Hall 371 <br/>    
Instructor: Charles Pletcher (charles.pletcher@tufts.edu) <br/>    
Instructor Office Hours: TTh 3–4pm <br/>    

Teaching Assistant: Zoë Spriggs (zoe.spriggs@tufts.edu) <br/>    
TA Office Hours: TBD

## Prerequisites

None

## Description

In a recent article in the _New Yorker_, Princeton professor D. Graham Burnett observes, "But to
be human is not to have answers. It is to have _questions_—and to live with them. The machines
can’t do that for us. Not now, not ever" ("Will the Humanities Survive Artificial Intelligence?",
April 26, 2025). For us to grapple with what "the machines" mean to us---or, in bleaker terms, what
business-types want artificial intelligence (AI) to mean for their bottom lines---we must first
understand the limits of what the machines can do.

This course explores the so-called "digital humanities" with a view towards the role of
computational methods, including AI, in the humanistic disciplines. This exploration will entail
learning to view textual and material objects of study from new angles, but it also involves
learning how to scrutinize each angle of interpretation.

Beginning with workshops on textual encoding, students will gain exposure to diverse disciplines
at the intersection of data science and the humanities, from Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
to Natural Language Processing (NLP), generative art and music, and network analysis.

Students will gain familiarity with the Python programming language, as well as tools like
Voyant, TEI XML, ArcGIS, and Gephi. Through readings ranging from antiquity to the present,
students will learn about the history of the digital humanities and engage in code criticism.

Assessments include weekly quizzes or discussion posts, collaborative projects, and a final
cumulative project of each student's design.

## Learning objectives

Successfully completing this course will equip students to

1.	Explain what the digital humanities are and how they relate to other forms of humanities research;
2.	Write and execute basic Python scripts;
3.	Pre-process a text/corpus in preparation for natural language processing;
4.	Parse complex data structures such as Python dictionaries and Pandas data frames;
5.	Apply digital methodologies of various kinds to humanities related data;
6.	Evaluate the methodologies and results of digital humanities projects.


## Textbooks

### Required

(These are all either open-access or available through the Tufts Library's digital subscriptions.)

- William Mattingly. _Introduction to Python for Humanists_. 2022. https://python-textbook.pythonhumanities.com/
- James O'Sullivan, ed. _The Bloomsbury Handbook to the Digital Humanities_. Bloomsbury, 2022.
- Plato. _Statesman. Philebus. Ion._ Translated by Harold North Fowler, W. R. M. Lamb. Loeb Classical Library 164. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1925. https://www.loebclassics.com/view/LCL164/1925/volume.xml

### Recommended

- Dennis Yi Tenen. _Literary Theory for Robots: How Computers Learned to Write_. W.W. Norton & Company, 2024.

Other readings will be provided through the course website.

## [Schedule](./schedule.md)

See the file located at [schedule.md](./schedule.md) for the most up-to-date list of assignments.

## Grading

- 1/6 Attendance and participation
- 1/6 Reading quizzes
- 1/3 Labs and midterm projects
- 1/3 Final project

This class will use the following grading scale, after applying the above weights:

- >= 90%: A
- 80–89%: B
- 70–79%: C
- 60–69%: D
- < 60%: F

Plusses and minuses will be appended to letter grades at the instructor's discretion.

### 1/6 Attendance and participation

As we only meet once a week, missing even one class could leave you far behind. Although
much of the material will be posted online, class time will be used to troubleshoot,
debug, and debrief (read: "vent about how hard programming is").

Obviously emergencies happen, and everyone is allowed one (1) unexcused absence. Further
unexcused absences will result in a deduction of half a letter grade _from your final grade_.

Excused absences are easy to obtain: please just give me as much notice as possible. (I try
to keep track of religious holidays, but a heads-up is always appreciated.)

### 1/6 Reading quizzes

Starting in Week 2, we will have a reading quiz approximately every other class. These quizzes
are not meant to be punitive. Rather, think of them as 10 minutes or so to reflect, as cogently
as you can, on specific aspects of the reading.

At the end of the semester, I will drop the lowest one (for graduate students) or two (for
undergraduates) reading quiz scores when calculating your average for the term.

### 1/3 Labs and midterm projects

We will start a lab in class approximately every other week; the lab will be due at 11:59 p.m.
following the next class.

Each lab will also ask you to write a short but detailed reflection on your process and
what you have learned. These short essays are meant to help you as you decide on your
midterm and final projects.

Think of the midterm project as the final project in miniature. This is a chance for you
to experiment with a methodology or take the next logical steps with a lab. If it works,
take the project even further for the final; if it doesn't, the final project gives you a
mulligan. **Null results are valid here.**

### 1/3 Final project

The final project is a chance for you to demonstrate your mastery over some aspect of digital
humanities that we have covered during the semester. Start thinking early about what experiments
you might want to run or what tools/resources you might want to build for your final project,
and feel free to send me an email or come to office hours as soon as you have ideas.

## Statement on AI

(Adapted from ["Artificial Intelligence"](https://provost.tufts.edu/celt/online-resources/artificial-intelligence/ai-syllabus-statements/)
by the Tufts' Center for the Enhancement of Learning and Teaching)

This course discourages the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI)
for translation assignments. At the same time, the course also provides
opportunities to explore the use of GAI in supplementing or augmenting our
abilities to engage with and understand Homeric song.

To this end, we will adhere to the following guidelines:

1. **NEVER** submit AI-generated work as your own. To do so is
considered a violation of Tufts' [Academic Integrity Policy]
(https://students.tufts.edu/community-standards/academic-integrity/academic-integrity-overview).
2. Familiarize yourself with the limitations of GAI tools. These tools all come with inherent
biases, and they all make mistakes. Be aware that no matter how "confident" the AI seems, it does
not actually "know" anything.
3. Cite all uses of AI. See suggestions from the [Chicago Manual of
Style](https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/qanda/data/faq/topics/Documentation/faq0422.html) and
the [MLA](https://style.mla.org/citing-generative-ai/).
4. In addition to citation, please identify _how_ the GAI contributed to your work. (Your
explanation need not be more than a sentence or two.)
5. If have any questions, please contact me by email, during office hours, or in class.

## Policies

### Attendance

Emergencies arise. Everyone is permitted one unexcused absence. If you will need to miss additional
classes, please let me know as soon as possible.

Each subsequent unexcused absence will result in a deduction of half a letter grade
from your final grade (i.e., an A will become an A-, an A- will become a B+, etc.).

You are responsible for catching up on any work that you have missed, either by coming to office
hours or working with a classmate. As a rule, I will not share lecture notes outside of what is
already available on the course website.

#### Heads-up about Thanksgiving

We will be having class on the Tuesday before Thanksgiving. As a once-weekly class, each session
is too important to miss. Please make your travel plans accordingly.

### Food and drink

Please eat only during breaks. (We'll have one about halfway through each class.)

Otherwise, please stay hydrated.


### Sharing

This course is designed for everyone to feel comfortable participating in discussion, asking
questions, learning, and facilitating the learning of others.  In order for that atmosphere to be
maintained, the recordings of our conversations will only be shared with the enrolled students in
the class (not posted publicly) and it is prohibited for any of us who have access to the video
to share it outside the course. Similarly, I have specifically designed the exams, handouts, and
lectures for the people who are enrolled in the course this term and those may not be shared outside
this course. All of this content is freely available on GitHub under a Creative Commons license —
attribution is all that is required.

## Resources

### Religious accommodations

Tufts University faculty, staff, and administration highly value and acknowledge the religious
diversity of its student body. Students seeking religious accommodations related to their holy
days are encouraged to collaborate with faculty to make arrangements during the first week of each
semester. Consult the [Multifaith Calendar](https://chaplaincy.tufts.edu/multifaith-calendar/)
for upcoming holidays, links to the University Religious Accommodations Policy, and members of the
University Chaplaincy who are available to respond to questions on religious observances.

### Accommodations for students with disabilities

Tufts is committed to providing equal access and support to all qualified students through
the provision of reasonable accommodations. If you have a disability that requires reasonable
accommodations, contact the StAAR Center at StaarCenter@tufts.edu or 617-627-4539. Please be aware
that accommodations cannot be enacted retroactively, making timeliness a critical aspect for their
provision.

### Academic support at the StAAR Center

The StAAR Center offers a variety of FREE resources to all students. Students may make an
appointment to work on any writing-related project or assignment, attend subject tutoring in a
variety of disciplines, or meet with an academic coach to hone skills like time management and
navigating procrastination. Students can make an appointment for any of these services by visiting
https://students.tufts.edu/staar-center.

### Student support, including mental health

As a student, there may be times when personal stressors or difficulties interfere with your
academic performance or well-being. The Dean of Student Affairs Office offers support and care
to undergraduates and graduate students who are experiencing difficulties, and can also aid
faculty in their work with students. In addition, through Tufts’ Counseling and Mental Health
Service (CMHS) students can access mental health support 24/7, and they can provide information on
additional resources. CMHS also provides confidential consultation, brief counseling, and urgent
care at no cost for all Tufts undergraduates as well as for graduate students who have paid the
student health fee. To make an appointment, call 617-627-3360. Please visit the CMHS website:
http://go.tufts.edu/Counseling to learn more about their services and resources.
